.Dd January 10, 2021
.Dt check-log4j 1
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm check-log4j
.Nd try to determine if a host is vulnerable to log4j CVE-2021-44228
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Nm
.Op Fl Vfhv
.Op Fl j Ar jar
.Op Fl p Ar path
.Op Fl s Ar skip
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Nm
tool attempts to determine whether the host it is
executed on is vulnerable to the logj4 RCE
vulnerability identified as CVE-2021-4428.
.Pp
Since this vulnerability is in a specific Java class
that may be inside nested Java archive files,
.Nm
may be somewhat intrusive to run and should be
executed with care and consideration of the system's
load.
Please see DETAILS for more information.
.Sh OPTIONS
The following options are supported by
.Nm :
.Bl -tag -width p_path_
.It Fl V
Print version number and exit.
.It Fl f
Attempt to apply mitigations for the vulnerability.
(This requires super-user privileges.)
.It Fl h
Print a short help message and exit.
.It Fl j Ar jar
Check only this archive, nothing else.
Can be specified multiple times for multiple JAR
(or other zip formatted archive) files.
.It Fl p Ar path
Limit filesystem traversal to this directory.
Can be specified multiple times.
If not specified,
.Nm
will default to '/'.
.It Fl s Ar skip
Skip the given checks.
Valid arguments are 'files', 'packages', and
\'processes'.
.It Fl v
Be verbose.
Can be specified multiple times.
.El
.Sh DETAILS
CVE-2021-4428 describes a possible remote code
execution (RCE) vulnerability in the popular log4j
framework.
Simply causing the vulnerable system to log a
specifically crafted message can the attacker gain
command execution and information disclosure
capabilities.
This vulnerability relies on an insecure default
setting applying to the Java Naming and Directory
Interface (JNDI).
.Pp
Specifically, a system that contains the
JndiLookup.class may enable the attack path in
question.
.Pp
To determine whether a host is vulnerable, the
.Nm
tool will perform the following checks:
.Bl -bullet -compact
.It
check for the existence of likely vulnerable packages
.It
check for the existence of java processes using the
\'JndiLookup' class
.El
.Pp
The discovery process may include running
.Xr find 1 ,
.Xr lsof 1 ,
or
.Xr rpm 1 ;
please use the
.Fl s
flag to skip any checks that might have a negative
impact on your host.
.Pp
The output of the command attempts to be human
readable and provide sufficient information to judge
whether the host requires attention.
.Sh ENVIRONMENT
The following environment variables influence the
behavior of
.Nm :
.Bl -tag
.It CHECK_LOG4J_FIND_OPTS_PRE
Additional options to pass to
.Xr find 1
prior to the path name(s).
.Pp
By default,
.Nm
runs "find / -type f -name '*.[ejw]ar'";
the contents of this variable are placed immediately
after the 'find' and before the path name(s).
.It CHECK_LOG4J_FIND_OPTS_POST
Additional options to pass to
.Xr find 1
immediately after the path name(s).
.El
.Sh EXAMPLES
Sample invocation on a non-vulnerable host:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
$ check-log4j
No obvious indicators of vulnerability found.
$
.Ed
.Pp
Sample invocation only looking at processes
.Bd -literal -offset indent
$ ./check-log4j.sh -s files -s packages -v -v
=> Running all checks...
==> Skipping package check.
==> Looking for jars...
==> Skipping files check.
==> Checking all found jars...
check-log4j.sh 1.0 localhost: Possibly vulnerable jar 'BOOT-INF/lib/log4j-core-2.14.1.jar' (inside of /home/jans/log4shell-vulnerable-app-0.0.1-SNAPSHOT.jar) used by process 15569.

$
.Ed
.Pp
Sample invocation searching only /var and /usr/local/lib
and skipping package and process checks:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
$ check-log4j -p /var -p /usr/local/lib -s packages -s processes
Possibly vulnerable jar '/usr/local/lib/jars/log4j-core-2.15.0.jar'.
Possibly vulnerable jar '/usr/local/lib/jars/log4j-core-2.15.jar'.
Possibly vulnerable jar '/usr/local/lib/jars/log4j-core-2.jar'.
Possibly vulnerable jar '/usr/local/lib/jars/log4j-core.jar'.

$
.Ed
.Pp
Note version comparisons are only done for packages,
which is why the above output incudes files ending in
a seemingly non-vulnerable version.
.Pp
To avoid mountpoint traversal on a Unix system where
.Xr find 1
requires the
.Fl x
flag to precede the paths:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
$ env CHECK_LOG4J_FIND_OPTS_PRE="-x" check-log4j
No obvious indicators of vulnerability found.
.Ed
.Pp
To only search files newer than '/tmp/foo':
.Bd -literal -offset indent
$ env CHECK_LOG4J_FIND_OPTS_POST="-newer /tmp/foo" check-log4j
No obvious indicators of vulnerability found.
.Ed
.Sh EXIT STATUS
.Nm
will return 0 if the host was found not to be
vulnerable and not in need of any update;
it will return 1 if a vulnerable jar or package was
detected.
.Pp
If no vulnerability to CVE-2021-44228 / CVE-2021-45046
was found, but versions below the desired minimum were
found,
.Nm
will return 2.
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr find 1 ,
.Xr lsof 1 ,
.Xr rpm 1
.Sh HISTORY
.Nm
was originally written by
.An Jan Schaumann
.Aq jans@yahooinc.com
in December 2021.
.Sh BUGS
Please file bugs and feature requests via GitHub pull
requests and issues or by emailing the author.
